content/astro-blog-minimal/index.mdx, before:

---
title: "Building a Blog with Astro and NetlifyCMS"
description: "A friend of mine asked me if it can be done, and so I had to figure it out!"
date: 2021-10-31
slug: 'astro-netlify-cms'
tags: ['astro', 'javascript', 'netlify', 'netlifycms']
---

For work, I have been trying to learn a bit more about some of our own tooling and so I wanted to explore
a bit more about how NetlifyCMS worked. I knew I wanted a light tool to compliment it with and so I thought
why not some good Astro!

<Callout>
  If you'd rather dig into the code, you can check it all out here (TODO: Add link). From this point forward,
  I will be chatting about the structure and decisions so far!
</Callout>

## Prerequisites

This assumes you have:
- Familiarity with JavaScript
- Installed Node (Version used `v16.18.0`)
- Uses NetlifyCMS (Version used `2.15.57`)
- Uses Astro (Version used `0.20.12`)

## Starting up the project

While you can use some of the other templates, I chose to go for the minimal starter:

```shell
mkdir astro-cms-blog
cd astro-cms-blog
npm init astro -- --template minimal
```

This will create a folder for you and then initialize the astro project with the
minimal amount of setup! I found this was really useful so I didn't have to tear
anything out like I would have for the other starters.

## Adding NetlifyCMS

Netlify offers its own Content Management System called NetlifyCMS. There are two
major files that the CMS needs from your production build in order to be all setup:
1. `public/config.yml` - A configuration YAML file. This is where you describe what data structure
the CMS should have
2. `admin/index.html` - An index.html file. This is what will render our admin dashboard for the CMS

You can add the `config.yml` in into the `public` folder. This is where you can describe how you want
to organize the elements in the CMS, where the posts are stored, and where images might go.

I took the basic structure of what [netlifycms.org](https://netlifycms.org) had on it already and just plopped it in.

```yaml
# public/config.yml
backend:
  name: git-gateway
  branch: master

publish_mode: editorial_workflow
local_backend: true # allows for you to locally mess with your CMS
media_folder: "public/images/uploads" # Media files will be stored in the repo under public/images/uploads
public_folder: "/images/uploads" # The src attribute for uploaded media will begin with /images/uploads
collections:
  - name: "blog" # Used in routes, e.g., /admin/collections/blog
    label: "Blog" # Used in the UI
    folder: "src/pages/blog" # The path to the folder where the documents are stored
    create: true # Allow users to create new documents in this collection
    slug: "{{year}}-{{month}}-{{day}}-{{slug}}" # Filename template, e.g., YYYY-MM-DD-title.md
    fields: # The fields for each document, usually in front matter
      - {label: "Title", name: "title", widget: "string"}
      - {label: "Publish Date", name: "date", widget: "datetime"}
      - {label: "Featured Image", name: "thumbnail", widget: "image"}
      - {label: "Body", name: "body", widget: "markdown"}
```

This sets up all the backend work, we still need to be sure to add in the `admin/index.html`. Before that,
let's setup the integration we'll need for NetlifyCMS first.

Let's make sure to add the dependency with: `npm install netlify-cms-app`

Because the NetlifyCMS uses React, we're going to need to create a new JSX Component under our `src/components/`
directory. This will allow us to extend the CMS in any ways we'd like for the future. I called mine `NetlifyCMS.jsx`

```js
// in src/components/NetlifyCMS.jsx
import NetlifyCMS from 'netlify-cms-app';

NetlifyCMS.init()
```

When this script gets added into our page, it will make sure to run everything our frontend needs. With that,
we need to add this to our `admin/index.html` page.

Astro allows for file-based routing, so you can create a file in your `src/pages` file in the same
path structure as you want the route to live in order to make it live. Since we want a `admin/index.html`,
we need to create an `index.astro` file under a new `admin` folder under our `src/pages`:

```astro
<!-- In src/pages/admin/index.astro -->
---
import NetlifyCMS from '../../components/NetlifyCMS.jsx'
---
<NetlifyCMS client:only />
```

Astro components (denoted with the .astro file extension) allows us to write import statements in the frontmatter
(the content between the two `---`). And from there we can add our import as a component like you see in JSX. The special
thing to note here is the `client:only`. This attribute on our component tells Astro, only run this script on the client.

Most of the time your Astro components won't need to do this. The reason why it is important here is because the NetlifyCMS
attaches itself directly into the window object and so when it gets rendered on the server, it fails to know what to do
since there is no window object. A small price to pay though!

### Adding a renderer

This is a small aside. If you were to try to run our project right now `npm run dev`, it would compile fine. However, if you go to your
CMS site ([http://localhost:3000/admin](http://localhost:3000/admin)), you'll see an error more than likely saying:

```
Error: Can't determine the renderer for NetlifyCMS. Include a hint similar to when multiple renderers are included in your Astro config.
```

This is because it cannot tell what type of component it is trying to process (React, Preact, Vue, Svelte) and to fix this, we need
to go diving into our `astro.config.mjs` and set the renderer. By default you have a few renderers installed as of `0.20` of Astro.
I chose to use Preact since it is close to React and was already pre-installed.

```js {3}
// In astro.config.mjs
export default /** @type {import('astro').AstroUserConfig} */ ({
  renderers: ['@astrojs/renderer-preact'],
});
```

And this is all the stuff we need to make sure at a bare minimum to have the CMS running and letting
us create content!

## Running the CMS

To run the CMS locally, you will want two terminals. One terminal will be running our astro server through: `npm run dev`.
And the second server will be used to allow for us to have a proxy server for the CMS to run through using `npx netlify-cms-proxy-server`.
You won't need to worry about the proxy server when you go to deploy your site, this is just helpful for local development.

With both of those running, you should be able to log in successfully in at [http://localhost:3000/admin](http://localhost:3000/admin) and be able to create
a blog post. Now when you go and publish your blog post this will produce a markdown file under `src/pages/blog/`. This is configurable
under the `public/config.yml` if you'd like for it go elsewhere or have any other attributes.

If you go and publish your first blog post, you'll be able to find it rendered in the
a URL pattern of: `http://localhost:3000/blog/YYYY-MM-DD-title`. Congrats on making your first
blog post working!

Right now our page looks a bit boring so we can spruce it up with a layout file instead!

## Adding a Blog Post Layout with Astro Layouts

If you want your blog post to look a certain way:

- Displaying the title in a certain size
- Having the publish date on it
- Content styled in the center

You will want to take advantage of an [Astro Layout component](https://docs.astro.build/core-concepts/layouts/)! In Astro, you can define layouts
under `src/layouts` and that allows you to include reusable designs for different parts of your site. This could also be advantageous if you want
different blog posts to have different designs and layout.

I came up with a small example of a potential layout but really play around with what works for you:

```markdown {2-6,14-19,26}
<!-- In src/layouts/BlogPost.astro -->
---
  const {content} = Astro.props;
  const {title, date} = content;
  const formattedDate = new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-US').format(new Date(date))
---
<html lang="en">

<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<link rel="icon" type="image/x-icon" href="/favicon.ico" />
	<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width" />
	<title>{title}</title>
  <style>
    .container {
      max-width: 600px;
      margin: 0 auto;
    }
  </style>
</head>

<body>
  <main class="container">
    <h2>{title}</h2>
    <time datetime={formattedDate}>{formattedDate}</time>
    <slot/>
  </main>
</body>
</html>
```

You can think of this component as a sketch of how our blog posts should render. Here's some spots to take note of: 
- You'll notice we're using the frontmater to pull out metadata for our blog post through `Astro.props`
- We defined our styles that we can consume for our blog post in the head tag
- Important: `slot` is a predefined spot that our markdown will fall into through the `default` name. If you want
more fine control of slots, you can read about [how to define and render them](https://docs.astro.build/core-concepts/astro-components/#slots)

To consume this layout, we will want to make sure our blog post markdown files have a new frontmatter key added to them called `layout`.
The `layout` will be given the location of our layout component file (`src/layouts/BlogPost.astro`)

If you've published a blog post already and not defined the layout, you can directly add it to the frontmatter like so:

```markdown {2}
---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: My New Blog Post
date: 2021-10-29T02:21:43.412Z
---
```

However, doing this manually _ever_ time sounds like a lot. So let's update our CMS to put this in by default for us:

```yml {17}
# public/config.yml
backend:
  name: git-gateway
  branch: master

publish_mode: editorial_workflow
local_backend: true # allows for you to locally mess with your CMS
media_folder: "public/images/uploads" # Media files will be stored in the repo under public/images/uploads
public_folder: "/images/uploads" # The src attribute for uploaded media will begin with /images/uploads
collections:
  - name: "blog" # Used in routes, e.g., /admin/collections/blog
    label: "Blog" # Used in the UI
    folder: "src/pages/blog" # The path to the folder where the documents are stored
    create: true # Allow users to create new documents in this collection
    slug: "{{year}}-{{month}}-{{day}}-{{slug}}" # Filename template, e.g., YYYY-MM-DD-title.md
    fields: # The fields for each document, usually in front matter
      - {label: "Layout", name: "layout", widget: "hidden", default: "../../layouts/BlogPost.astro"}
      - {label: "Title", name: "title", widget: "string"}
      - {label: "Publish Date", name: "date", widget: "datetime"}
      - {label: "Featured Image", name: "thumbnail", widget: "image"}
      - {label: "Body", name: "body", widget: "markdown"}
```

And now all future blog posts will have this layout!

## Conclusion

This is just the tip of the iceberg you can get away with for Astro and the NetlifyCMS.
Play around with the layout and style them however you'd like. If you wanted a bit of direction,
here are some ways to keep going:
- Adding all blog posts onto the `src/pages/index.astro` page with [`Astro.fetchContent()`](https://docs.astro.build/reference/api-reference/#astrofetchcontent)
- [Adding an RSS Feed for your site](https://docs.astro.build/guides/rss/)
- [Deploying your site using Netlify](https://docs.astro.build/guides/deploy/#netlify)
- After deploying your site, [Activating Netlify Identity so you can access the CMS](https://docs.netlify.com/visitor-access/identity/)

Commit message:

Add GitHub repo link and update branch for CMS

content/astro-blog-minimal/index.mdx, after:

---
title: "Building a Blog with Astro and NetlifyCMS"
description: "A friend of mine asked me if it can be done, and so I had to figure it out!"
date: 2021-10-31
slug: 'astro-netlify-cms'
tags: ['astro', 'javascript', 'netlify', 'netlifycms']
---

For work, I have been trying to learn a bit more about some of our own tooling and so I wanted to explore
a bit more about how NetlifyCMS worked. I knew I wanted a light tool to compliment it with and so I thought
why not some good Astro!

<Callout>
  If you'd rather dig into the code, [you can check it all out on my GitHub](https://github.com/maxcell/astro-netlifycms-example). From this point forward,
  I will be chatting about the structure and decisions so far!
</Callout>

## Prerequisites

This assumes you have:
- Familiarity with JavaScript
- Installed Node (Version used `v16.18.0`)
- Uses NetlifyCMS (Version used `2.15.57`)
- Uses Astro (Version used `0.20.12`)

## Starting up the project

While you can use some of the other templates, I chose to go for the minimal starter:

```shell
mkdir astro-cms-blog
cd astro-cms-blog
npm init astro -- --template minimal
```

This will create a folder for you and then initialize the astro project with the
minimal amount of setup! I found this was really useful so I didn't have to tear
anything out like I would have for the other starters.

## Adding NetlifyCMS

Netlify offers its own Content Management System called NetlifyCMS. There are two
major files that the CMS needs from your production build in order to be all setup:
1. `public/config.yml` - A configuration YAML file. This is where you describe what data structure
the CMS should have
2. `admin/index.html` - An index.html file. This is what will render our admin dashboard for the CMS

You can add the `config.yml` in into the `public` folder. This is where you can describe how you want
to organize the elements in the CMS, where the posts are stored, and where images might go.

I took the basic structure of what [netlifycms.org](https://netlifycms.org) had on it already and just plopped it in.

```yaml
# public/config.yml
backend:
  name: git-gateway
  branch: main # NOTE this relates to your GitHub branch

publish_mode: editorial_workflow
local_backend: true # allows for you to locally mess with your CMS
media_folder: "public/images/uploads" # Media files will be stored in the repo under public/images/uploads
public_folder: "/images/uploads" # The src attribute for uploaded media will begin with /images/uploads
collections:
  - name: "blog" # Used in routes, e.g., /admin/collections/blog
    label: "Blog" # Used in the UI
    folder: "src/pages/blog" # The path to the folder where the documents are stored
    create: true # Allow users to create new documents in this collection
    slug: "{{year}}-{{month}}-{{day}}-{{slug}}" # Filename template, e.g., YYYY-MM-DD-title.md
    fields: # The fields for each document, usually in front matter
      - {label: "Title", name: "title", widget: "string"}
      - {label: "Publish Date", name: "date", widget: "datetime"}
      - {label: "Featured Image", name: "thumbnail", widget: "image"}
      - {label: "Body", name: "body", widget: "markdown"}
```

This sets up all the backend work, we still need to be sure to add in the `admin/index.html`. Before that,
let's setup the integration we'll need for NetlifyCMS first.

Let's make sure to add the dependency with: `npm install netlify-cms-app`

Because the NetlifyCMS uses React, we're going to need to create a new JSX Component under our `src/components/`
directory. This will allow us to extend the CMS in any ways we'd like for the future. I called mine `NetlifyCMS.jsx`

```js
// in src/components/NetlifyCMS.jsx
import NetlifyCMS from 'netlify-cms-app';

NetlifyCMS.init()
```

When this script gets added into our page, it will make sure to run everything our frontend needs. With that,
we need to add this to our `admin/index.html` page.

Astro allows for file-based routing, so you can create a file in your `src/pages` file in the same
path structure as you want the route to live in order to make it live. Since we want a `admin/index.html`,
we need to create an `index.astro` file under a new `admin` folder under our `src/pages`:

```astro
<!-- In src/pages/admin/index.astro -->
---
import NetlifyCMS from '../../components/NetlifyCMS.jsx'
---
<NetlifyCMS client:only />
```

Astro components (denoted with the .astro file extension) allows us to write import statements in the frontmatter
(the content between the two `---`). And from there we can add our import as a component like you see in JSX. The special
thing to note here is the `client:only`. This attribute on our component tells Astro, only run this script on the client.

Most of the time your Astro components won't need to do this. The reason why it is important here is because the NetlifyCMS
attaches itself directly into the window object and so when it gets rendered on the server, it fails to know what to do
since there is no window object. A small price to pay though!

### Adding a renderer

This is a small aside. If you were to try to run our project right now `npm run dev`, it would compile fine. However, if you go to your
CMS site ([http://localhost:3000/admin](http://localhost:3000/admin)), you'll see an error more than likely saying:

```
Error: Can't determine the renderer for NetlifyCMS. Include a hint similar to when multiple renderers are included in your Astro config.
```

This is because it cannot tell what type of component it is trying to process (React, Preact, Vue, Svelte) and to fix this, we need
to go diving into our `astro.config.mjs` and set the renderer. By default you have a few renderers installed as of `0.20` of Astro.
I chose to use Preact since it is close to React and was already pre-installed.

```js {3}
// In astro.config.mjs
export default /** @type {import('astro').AstroUserConfig} */ ({
  renderers: ['@astrojs/renderer-preact'],
});
```

And this is all the stuff we need to make sure at a bare minimum to have the CMS running and letting
us create content!

## Running the CMS

To run the CMS locally, you will want two terminals. One terminal will be running our astro server through: `npm run dev`.
And the second server will be used to allow for us to have a proxy server for the CMS to run through using `npx netlify-cms-proxy-server`.
You won't need to worry about the proxy server when you go to deploy your site, this is just helpful for local development.

With both of those running, you should be able to log in successfully in at [http://localhost:3000/admin](http://localhost:3000/admin) and be able to create
a blog post. Now when you go and publish your blog post this will produce a markdown file under `src/pages/blog/`. This is configurable
under the `public/config.yml` if you'd like for it go elsewhere or have any other attributes.

If you go and publish your first blog post, you'll be able to find it rendered in the
a URL pattern of: `http://localhost:3000/blog/YYYY-MM-DD-title`. Congrats on making your first
blog post working!

Right now our page looks a bit boring so we can spruce it up with a layout file instead!

## Adding a Blog Post Layout with Astro Layouts

If you want your blog post to look a certain way:

- Displaying the title in a certain size
- Having the publish date on it
- Content styled in the center

You will want to take advantage of an [Astro Layout component](https://docs.astro.build/core-concepts/layouts/)! In Astro, you can define layouts
under `src/layouts` and that allows you to include reusable designs for different parts of your site. This could also be advantageous if you want
different blog posts to have different designs and layout.

I came up with a small example of a potential layout but really play around with what works for you:

```markdown {2-6,14-19,26}
<!-- In src/layouts/BlogPost.astro -->
---
  const {content} = Astro.props;
  const {title, date} = content;
  const formattedDate = new Intl.DateTimeFormat('en-US').format(new Date(date))
---
<html lang="en">

<head>
	<meta charset="utf-8" />
	<link rel="icon" type="image/x-icon" href="/favicon.ico" />
	<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width" />
	<title>{title}</title>
  <style>
    .container {
      max-width: 600px;
      margin: 0 auto;
    }
  </style>
</head>

<body>
  <main class="container">
    <h2>{title}</h2>
    <time datetime={formattedDate}>{formattedDate}</time>
    <slot/>
  </main>
</body>
</html>
```

You can think of this component as a sketch of how our blog posts should render. Here's some spots to take note of: 
- You'll notice we're using the frontmater to pull out metadata for our blog post through `Astro.props`
- We defined our styles that we can consume for our blog post in the head tag
- Important: `slot` is a predefined spot that our markdown will fall into through the `default` name. If you want
more fine control of slots, you can read about [how to define and render them](https://docs.astro.build/core-concepts/astro-components/#slots)

To consume this layout, we will want to make sure our blog post markdown files have a new frontmatter key added to them called `layout`.
The `layout` will be given the location of our layout component file (`src/layouts/BlogPost.astro`)

If you've published a blog post already and not defined the layout, you can directly add it to the frontmatter like so:

```markdown {2}
---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: My New Blog Post
date: 2021-10-29T02:21:43.412Z
---
```

However, doing this manually _ever_ time sounds like a lot. So let's update our CMS to put this in by default for us:

```yml {17}
# public/config.yml
backend:
  name: git-gateway
  branch: master

publish_mode: editorial_workflow
local_backend: true # allows for you to locally mess with your CMS
media_folder: "public/images/uploads" # Media files will be stored in the repo under public/images/uploads
public_folder: "/images/uploads" # The src attribute for uploaded media will begin with /images/uploads
collections:
  - name: "blog" # Used in routes, e.g., /admin/collections/blog
    label: "Blog" # Used in the UI
    folder: "src/pages/blog" # The path to the folder where the documents are stored
    create: true # Allow users to create new documents in this collection
    slug: "{{year}}-{{month}}-{{day}}-{{slug}}" # Filename template, e.g., YYYY-MM-DD-title.md
    fields: # The fields for each document, usually in front matter
      - {label: "Layout", name: "layout", widget: "hidden", default: "../../layouts/BlogPost.astro"}
      - {label: "Title", name: "title", widget: "string"}
      - {label: "Publish Date", name: "date", widget: "datetime"}
      - {label: "Featured Image", name: "thumbnail", widget: "image"}
      - {label: "Body", name: "body", widget: "markdown"}
```

And now all future blog posts will have this layout!

## Conclusion

This is just the tip of the iceberg you can get away with for Astro and the NetlifyCMS.
Play around with the layout and style them however you'd like. If you wanted a bit of direction,
here are some ways to keep going:
- Adding all blog posts onto the `src/pages/index.astro` page with [`Astro.fetchContent()`](https://docs.astro.build/reference/api-reference/#astrofetchcontent)
- [Adding an RSS Feed for your site](https://docs.astro.build/guides/rss/)
- [Deploying your site using Netlify](https://docs.astro.build/guides/deploy/#netlify)
- After deploying your site, [Activating Netlify Identity so you can access the CMS](https://docs.netlify.com/visitor-access/identity/)
