content/callout-component/index.mdx, before:

---
title: 'Adding Callouts to a MDX-Powered Gatsby Blog'
date: '2020-05-20'
description: ""
slug: 'callout'
tags: ['react', 'design', 'notetaking', 'mdx']
---

A big part about blogging for me is making my content accessible for folks. A way for me to do that is highlighting important information. I decided to try to write up a component that helps put text in a more noticeable way. This has sometimes been referred to as a callout:

<Callout>
  This is the base variant to callout something on my site
</Callout>

To render this looks like:

```jsx
<Callout>
  This is the base variant to callout something on my site
</Callout>
```

The code that powers it:

```jsx
/* @jsx jsx */
import React from 'react';
import { jsx } from '@emotion/core';
 
export default function Callout({ variant = 'info', children }) {
  const variantStyles = {
    info: {
      borderLeft: '5px solid rgb(119, 32, 115)',
      backgroundColor: 'hsla(303, 74%, 92%, 0.4)',
    },
    danger: {
      borderLeft: '5px solid #f44336',
      backgroundColor: 'rgb(253, 236, 234)'
    }
  }
  return (
    <aside
      css={{
        padding: '1rem 2rem',
        margin: '1.5rem auto',
        ...variantStyles[variant]
      }}>
      {children}
    </aside>
  );
}
```

The component is meant to be light in what it needs to do. We pass through text and change the
styling based on the props received. The `Callout` can be shown in different variants to 
communicate different things, such as severity:

<Callout variant="danger">
  DANGER! DANGER! Pay attention to this!
</Callout>

```jsx
<Callout variant="danger">
  DANGER! DANGER! Pay attention to this!
</Callout>
```

This component is super nice for me and I am sure I can make it even better in the future.
Now in my authoring process, I wanted to be able to have this available for me in any of my MDX files.

## Add a component to all MDX files

To tie everything together, I needed to take this component and pass it into my `MDXProvider`. This will
make sure that I have access to the component without having to directly import it every time I need it.


```jsx {2,6}
// src/pages/layout.js
import Callout from '../components/Callout'

const components = {
  // ... All my other components
  Callout
}


export default function Layout(props) {
  return (
    <MDXProvider 
      component={components}
    >
    {/* ... */}
    </MDXProvider>
  )
}
```

<Callout>

**Note for MDX v1 users**

If you intend to use markdown inside of the `Callout`, you'll
need to put newlines before and after your text blocks.

</Callout>

And that's it! Shoutout to some folks who have this similar thing on their 
site, like [Tania Rascia](https://www.taniarascia.com/) and [Josh Comeau](https://joshwcomeau.com/).
Also shoutout to Joe Previte for his [blog post](https://joeprevite.com/writing-custom-note-component-mdx)
on creating a custom component because that helped pave the thought clearly in my mind!

Commit message:

Update content to have descriptions

content/callout-component/index.mdx, after:

---
title: 'Adding Callouts to a MDX-Powered Gatsby Blog'
date: '2020-05-20'
description: 'A big part about blogging for me is making my content accessible for folks. A way for me to do that is highlighting important information with a callout.'
slug: 'callout'
tags: ['react', 'design', 'notetaking', 'mdx']
---

A big part about blogging for me is making my content accessible for folks. A way for me to do that is highlighting important information. I decided to try to write up a component that helps put text in a more noticeable way. This has sometimes been referred to as a callout:

<Callout>
  This is the base variant to callout something on my site
</Callout>

To render this looks like:

```jsx
<Callout>
  This is the base variant to callout something on my site
</Callout>
```

The code that powers it:

```jsx
/* @jsx jsx */
import React from 'react';
import { jsx } from '@emotion/core';
 
export default function Callout({ variant = 'info', children }) {
  const variantStyles = {
    info: {
      borderLeft: '5px solid rgb(119, 32, 115)',
      backgroundColor: 'hsla(303, 74%, 92%, 0.4)',
    },
    danger: {
      borderLeft: '5px solid #f44336',
      backgroundColor: 'rgb(253, 236, 234)'
    }
  }
  return (
    <aside
      css={{
        padding: '1rem 2rem',
        margin: '1.5rem auto',
        ...variantStyles[variant]
      }}>
      {children}
    </aside>
  );
}
```

The component is meant to be light in what it needs to do. We pass through text and change the
styling based on the props received. The `Callout` can be shown in different variants to 
communicate different things, such as severity:

<Callout variant="danger">
  DANGER! DANGER! Pay attention to this!
</Callout>

```jsx
<Callout variant="danger">
  DANGER! DANGER! Pay attention to this!
</Callout>
```

This component is super nice for me and I am sure I can make it even better in the future.
Now in my authoring process, I wanted to be able to have this available for me in any of my MDX files.

## Add a component to all MDX files

To tie everything together, I needed to take this component and pass it into my `MDXProvider`. This will
make sure that I have access to the component without having to directly import it every time I need it.


```jsx {2,6}
// src/pages/layout.js
import Callout from '../components/Callout'

const components = {
  // ... All my other components
  Callout
}


export default function Layout(props) {
  return (
    <MDXProvider 
      component={components}
    >
    {/* ... */}
    </MDXProvider>
  )
}
```

<Callout>

**Note for MDX v1 users**

If you intend to use markdown inside of the `Callout`, you'll
need to put newlines before and after your text blocks.

</Callout>

And that's it! Shoutout to some folks who have this similar thing on their 
site, like [Tania Rascia](https://www.taniarascia.com/) and [Josh Comeau](https://joshwcomeau.com/).
Also shoutout to Joe Previte for his [blog post](https://joeprevite.com/writing-custom-note-component-mdx)
on creating a custom component because that helped pave the thought clearly in my mind!
